.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\" First parameter, NAME, should be all caps
.\" Second parameter, SECTION, should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
.\" other parameters are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
.Dd Oct 17, 2020
.Dt FINIT.CONF 5 SMM
.Os Linux
.Sh NAME
.Nm finit.conf
.Nd Finit configuration file format
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm /etc/finit.conf
.Nm /etc/finit.d/*.conf
.Nm /etc/finit.d/available/*.conf
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm finit
can be configured using only the original
.Pa /etc/finit.conf
file or in combination with
.Pa /etc/finit.d/*.conf .
Useful for package-based Linux distributions \(em each package can
provide its own "script" file.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width /etc/finit.d/*.conf -offset indent -compact
.It Pa /etc/finit.conf
Main configuration file
.It Pa /etc/finit.d/*.conf
Snippets, usually one service per file
.El
.Pp
Not all configuration directives are available in
.Pa /etc/finit.d/*.conf
and some directives are only available at bootstrap, runlevel
.Cm S ,
see the section
.Sx Limitations
below for details.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /etc/finit.d/available/*.conf -compact
.It Pa /etc/finit.conf
Main configuration file
.It Pa /etc/finit.d/*.conf
Static service definitions
.It Pa /etc/finit.d/available/*.conf
Available services
.It Pa /etc/finit.d/enabled/*.conf
Enabled services, symlinks from available
.El
.Sh FILE FORMAT
Lines starting with `#' are ignored. Note that end-of-line comments are
NOT supported, comments must be on a line of their own.
.Pp
A configuration stanza must be on a single (long) line and
.Em cannot
be broken up in multiple lines by use of a backslash as the last
character.
.Sh DIRECTIVES
This section lists all supported configuration directives.  There also exist
deprecated directives, see the Markdown documentation for details on these.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width 1n
.It Cm rlimit Oo hard|soft Oc Ar RESOURCE Aq LIMIT | unlimited
.Pp
Set the hard or soft limit for a resource, or both if that argument is
omitted.
.Ar RESOURCE
is the lower-case
.Cm RLIMIT_
string constants from
.Xr setrlimit 2 ,
without prefix.  E.g. to set
.Cm RLIMIT_CPU ,
use
.Cm cpu .
.Pp
.Ar LIMIT
is an integer that depends on the resource being modified, see
the man page, or the kernel
.Pa /proc/PID/limits
file, for details.
Finit versions before v3.1 used
.Cm infinity
for
.Cm unlimited ,
which is still supported, albeit deprecated.
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent
# No process is allowed more than 8MB of address space
rlimit hard as 8388608

# Core dumps may be arbitrarily large
rlimit soft core infinity

# CPU limit for all services, soft & hard = 10 sec
rlimit cpu 10
.Ed
.Pp
.Cm rlimit
can be set globally, in
.Pa /etc/finit.conf ,
or locally per each
.Pa /etc/finit.d/*.conf
read.  I.e., a set of task/run/service stanzas can share the same
rlimits if they are in the same .conf.
.It Cm runlevel Aq N
The system runlevel to go to after bootstrap (S) has completed.
.Cm N
is the runlevel number 0-9, where 6 is reserved for reboot and 0 for
halt.  All other can be used by operating system administrators.
Default: 2
.Pp
.Sy Note:
only read and executed in runlevel S (bootstrap).
.It Cm run Oo LVLS Oc Ao COND Ac Ar /path/to/cmd ARGS Op -- Optional description
One-shot command to run in sequence when entering a runlevel, with
optional arguments and description.
.Pp  
.Cm run
commands are guaranteed to be completed before running the next
command.  Highly useful if true serialization is needed.  Usually
only used in the bootstrap (S) runlevel.
.Pp
.Cm Aq COND
conditions are described in
.Xr finit 8 ,
see also the
.Sx Examples
section below.
.It Cm task Oo LVLS Oc Ao COND Ac Ar /path/to/cmd ARGS Op -- Optional description
One-shot like
.Cm run ,
but starts in parallel with the next command.
.Pp  
Both
.Cm run
and
.Cm task
commands are run in a shell, so pipes and redirects can be freely used:
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent
task [s] echo "foo" | cat >/tmp/bar
.Ed
.It Cm sysv Oo LVLS Oc Ao COND Ac Ar /path/to/script ARGS Op -- Optional description
Similar to
.Cm task
is the
.Cm sysv
stanza, which can be used to call SysV style start/stop scripts.  The
primary intention for this command is to be able to re-use much of
existing setup and init scripts in Linux distributions.
.Pp  
When entering an allowed runlevel, Finit calls
.Cm init-script start ,
when entering a disallowed runlevel, Finit calls
.Cm init-script stop ,
and if the Finit .conf, where the
.Cm sysv
stanza is declared, is modified, Finit calls
.Cm init-script restart
on
.Cm initctl reload .
Similar to how
.Cm service
stanzas work.
.Pp
Forking services started with
.Cm sysv
scripts can be monitored by Finit by declaring the PID file to look for:
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent
sysv pid:!/path/to/pidfile.pid /path/to/script ...
.Ed
.Pp
The leading '!' is to prevent Finit from managing the PID file, which is
the default behavior for the
.Cm pid:
command modifier.
.It Cm service Oo LVLS Oc Ao COND Ac Ar /path/to/daemon ARGS Op -- Optional description
Service, or daemon, to be monitored and automatically restarted if it
exits prematurely.  Finit tries to restart services that die, by
default 10 times, before giving up and marking them as
.Em crashed .
After which they have to be restarted manually using
.Cm initctl restart NAME .
The number of restarts, the delay between each restart, and more is
configurable, see the options below.
.Pp  
For daemons that support it, we recommend appending
.Cm --foreground , --no-background , -n , -F ,
or similar command line argument to prevent them from forking off a
sub-process in the background.  This is the most reliable way to monitor
a service.
.Pp
However, not all daemons support running in the foreground, or they may
start logging to the foreground as well, these are called forking
services and are supported using the same syntax as forking
.Cm sysv
services, using the
.Cm pid:!/path/to/pidfile.pid
command modifier syntax.  There is an alternative syntax that may be
more intuitive, where Finit can also guess the PID file based on the
daemon's command name:
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent
service type:forking ntpd -- NTP daemon
.Ed
.Pp
Here we let BusyBox
.Nm ntpd
daemonize itself.  Finit uses the basename of the binary to guess the
PID file to watch for the PID:
.Pa /var/run/ntpd.pid .
If Finit guesses wrong, you have to submit the full
.Cm pid:!/path/to/file.pid
option to your service stanza.
.Pp
.Sy Example: in the case of
.Cm ospfd
(below), we omit the
.Cm -d
flag (daemonize) to prevent it from forking to the background:
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent
service [2345] <pid/zebra> /sbin/ospfd -- OSPF daemon
.Ed
.Pp
.Cm [2345]
denote the runlevels
.Cm ospfd
is allowed to run in, they are optional and default to runlevel 2-5 if
omitted.
.Pp
.Cm <pid/zebra>
is the condition for starting
.Cm ospfd .
In this example Finit waits for another service,
.Cm zebra ,
to have created its PID file in
.Pa /var/run/quagga/zebra.pid
before starting
.Cm ospfd .
Finit watches *all* files in
.Pa /var/run ,
for each file named
.Cm *.pid ,
.Cm */pid ,
Finit opens it and find the matching
.Cm NAME:ID
using the PID.
.Pp
Some services do not maintain a PID file and rather than patching each
application Finit provides a workaround.  A
.Cm pid
modifier keyword can be set to have Finit automatically create (when
starting) and later remove (when stopping) the PID file.  The file is
created in the
.Pa /var/run
directory using the
.Xr basename 3
of the service.  The full syntax of the
.Cm pid
modifier is:
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent
pid[:[!][/path/to/]filename[.pid]]
.Ed
.Pp
For example, by adding
.Cm pid:/run/foo.pid
to the service
.Cm /sbin/bar ,
that PID file will, not only be created and removed automatically, but
also be used by the Finit condition subsystem.  So a service/run/task
can depend on the
.Cm <pid/bar>
condition.
.Pp
If a service should not be automatically started, it can be configured
as manual with the
.Cm manual:yes
command modifier.  The service can then be started at any time by
running
.Cm initctl start NAME
.Pp
The name of a service, shown by the
.Cm initctl
tool, defaults to the basename of the service executable. It can be
changed with the
.Cm name:foo
command modifier.
.Pp
As mentioned previously, services are automatically restarted should
they crash, this is configurable with the following options:
.Bl -tag -width 1n
.It Cm restart:NUM
number of times Finit tries to restart a crashing
service, default: 10.  When this limit is reached the service is
marked
.Em crashed
and must be restarted manually with
.Xr initctl 8 .
.It Cm restart_sec:SEC
number of seconds before Finit tries to restart
a crashing service, default: 2 seconds for the first five retries,
then back-off to 5 seconds.  The maximum of this configured value
and the above (2 and 5) will be used
.It Cm norestart
dont restart on failures, same as
.Cm restart:0
.It Cm oncrash:reboot
when all retries have failed, and the service
has
.Em crashed ,
if this option is set the system is rebooted.  Note, future releases
may include other
.Cm oncrash:
actions.
.El
.Pp
When stopping a service (run/task/sysv/service), either manually or when
moving to another runlevel, Finit starts by sending SIGTERM, to allow
the process to shut down gracefully.  If the process has not been
collected within 3 seconds, Finit sends SIGKILL.  To halt the process
using a different signal, use the command modifier
.Cm halt:SIGNAL ,
e.g.,
.Cm halt:SIGPWR .
To change the delay between your halt signal and KILL, use the command
modifier
.Cm kill:SEC ,
e.g.,
.Cm kill:10
to wait 10 seconds before sending SIGKILL.
.Pp
Services support the
.Cm pre:script
and
.Cm post:script
command actions as well.  These run as the same
.Cm @USER:GROUP
as the service itself, with any
.Cm env:file
sourced.  The scripts must use an absolute path, but are executed from
the
.Cm $HOME
of the given user.  The scripts are not called with any argument
(currently), but both get the
.Cm SERVICE_IDENT=foo
environment variable set.  Here
.Cm foo
denotes the identity of the service, which if there are multiple
services named
.Cm foo ,
may be
.Cm foo:1 ,
or any unique identifier specified in the .conf file.  The
.Cm post:script
is called with an additional set of environment variables:
.Bl -tag -offset indent -width 1n
.It Cm EXIT_CODE=[exited,signal]
set to one of
.Cm exited
or
.Cm signal
.It Cm EXIT_STATUS=[num,SIGNAME]
set to one of exit status code from the program, if it exited normally,
or the signal name (HUP, TERM, etc.) if it exited due to signal
.El
.Pp
The scripts have a default execution time of 3 seconds before they are
SIGKILLed, this can be adjusted using the
.Cm kill:SEC
modifier syntax.
.Pp
.Sy Note:
the
.Cm pre:script
.Em must
be idempotent, because a service can transition between READY and HALTED
states any number of times before going to RUNNING.
.It Cm runparts Aq DIR
Call
.Xr run-parts 8
on
.Cm DIR
to run start scripts.  All executable files, or scripts, in the
directory are called, in alphabetic order.  The scripts in this
directory are executed at the very end of bootstrap, runlevel S.
.Pp
It can be beneficial to use
.Cm S01name ,
.Cm S02othername ,
etc. if there is a dependency order between the scripts.  Symlinks to
existing daemons can talso be used, but make sure they daemonize by
default.
.Pp
Similar to the
.Pa /etc/rc.local
shell script, make sure that all your services and programs either
terminate or start in the background or you will block Finit.
.Sy Note:
only read and executed in runlevel S (bootstrap).
.It Cm include Aq CONF
Include another configuration file.  Absolute path required.
.It Cm log size:BYTES count:NUM
Log rotation for run/task/services using the
.Cm log
command modifier with redirection to a log file.  Global setting,
applies to all services.
.Pp
The size can be given as bytes, without a specifier, or in `k`, `M`,
or `G`, e.g.
.Cm size:10M ,
or
.Cm size:3G .
A value of
.Cm size:0
disables log rotation.  The default is
.Cm size:200k .
.Pp
The count value is recommended to be between 1-5, with a default 5.
Setting count to 0 means the logfile will be truncated when the MAX
size limit is reached.
.It Cm tty Oo LVLS Oc Ao COND Ac Ar DEV Oo BAUD Oc Oo noclear Oc Oo nowait Oc Oo nologin Oc Oo TERM Oc
This form of the
.Cm tty
stanza uses the built-in getty on the given TTY device
.Ar DEV ,
in the given runlevels.
.Ar DEV may be the special keyword
.Cm @console ,
or `console`, which is expanded from `/sys/class/tty/console/active`,
useful on embedded systems.
.Pp
The default baud rate is 0, i.e., keep kernel default.
.Pp
The `tty` stanza inherits runlevel, condition (and other feature)
parsing from the `service` stanza.  So TTYs can run in one or many
runlevels and depend on any condition supported by Finit.  This is
useful e.g. to depend on `<pid/elogind>` before starting a TTY.
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent
tty [12345] /dev/ttyAMA0 115200 noclear vt220
.Ed
.It Cm tty Oo LVLS Oc Ao COND Ac Ar CMD DEV Oo noclear Oc Oo nowait Oc
This form of the
.Cm tty
stanza is for using an external getty, like agetty or the BusyBox getty.
.Pp
By default, these first two syntax variants
.Em clear
the TTY and
.Em wait
for the user to press enter before starting getty.
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent
tty [12345] /sbin/getty  -L 115200 /dev/ttyAMA0 vt100
tty [12345] /sbin/agetty -L ttyAMA0 115200 vt100 nowait
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Cm noclear
option disables clearing the TTY after each session.  Clearing the TTY
when a user logs out is usually preferable.
.Pp  
The
.Cm nowait
option disables the
.Cm Please press Enter to activate console
message before actually starting the getty program.  On small and
embedded systems running multiple unused getty wastes both memory and
CPU cycles, so `wait` is the preferred default.
.Pp
The
.Cm nologin
option disables getty and
.Pa /bin/login ,
and gives the user a root (login) shell on the given TTY
.Cm DEV
immediately.  Needless to say, this is a rather insecure option, but can
be very useful for developer builds, during board bringup, or similar.
.Pp
Notice the ordering, the
.Cm TERM
option to the built-in getty must be the last argument.
.Pp
Embedded systems may want to enable automatic `DEV` by supplying the
special
.Cm @console
device.  This works regardless weather the system uses
.Cm ttyS0 , ttyAMA0 ,  ttyMXC0 ,
or anything else.  Finit figures it out by querying sysfs:
.Pa /sys/class/tty/console/active .
The speed can be omitted to keep the kernel default.
.Pp
Most systems get by fine by just using `console`, which will evaluate
to
.Pa /dev/console .
If you have to use
.Cm @console
to get any output, you may have some issue with your kernel config.
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent
tty [12345] @console noclear vt220
.Ed
.Pp
On really bare bones systems, or for board bringup, Finit can give you a
shell prompt as soon as bootstrap is done, without opening any device
node:
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent
tty [12345789] notty
.Ed
.Pp
This should of course not be enabled on production systems.  Because it
may give a user root access without having to log in.  However, for
board bringup and system debugging it can come in handy.
.Pp
One can also use the
.Cm service
stanza to start a stand-alone shell:
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent
service [12345] /bin/sh -l
.Ed
.Pp
.It Cm tty Oo LVLS Oc Ao COND Ac Oo notty Oc Oo rescue Oc
The third
.Cm tty
form is for board bringup and the
.Cm rescue
boot mode.  No device node is required in this variant, the same output
that the kernel uses is reused for stdio.  If the
.Cm rescue
option is omitted, a shell is started.  The flags
.Cm nologin , noclear ,
and
.Cm nowait
are implied.   If the
.Cm rescue
option is set the bundled
.Pa /libexec/finit/sulogin
is started to present a bare-bones root login prompt.  If the root
(uid:0, gid:0) user does not have a password set, no rescue is possible.
.El
.Sh COMMAND MODIFIERS
The run/task/tty/service/sysv stanzas take modifiers, or options, to
control their behavior.  This section lists them with their limitations.
All modifiers must be placed between the stanza and its command.
.Bl -tag -width 1n
.It Cm @user:group
Every
.Cm run , task ,
or
.Cm service
can also list the privileges the
.Cm /path/to/cmd
should be executed with.  Prefix the command with
.Cm @USR[:GRP] ,
group is optional, like this:
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent
run [2345] @joe:users logger "Hello world"
.Ed
.Pp
For multiple instances of the same command, e.g. a DHCP client or
multiple web servers, add
.Cm :ID
somewhere between the
.Cm run , task , service
keyword and the command, like this:
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent
service :80  [2345] httpd -f -h /http -p 80   -- Web server
service :8080[2345] httpd -f -h /http -p 8080 -- Old web server
.Ed
.Pp
Without the
.Cm :ID
to the service the latter will overwrite the former and only the old web
server would be started and supervised.
.It Cm log:/path/to/file
Redirect stdout/stderr of a command to the given log file.  See the
global log directive, above, for details on log rotation.
.It Cm log:console
Redirect stdout/stderr of a command to
.Pa /dev/console ,
only use this for debugging or bringup.
.It Cm log:null
Redirect stdout/stderr of a command to
.Pa /dev/null .
.It Cm log:prio:facility.level,tag:ident
Redirect stdout/stderr of a command to syslog using the given priority
and tag identity.
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent
service log:prio:user.warn,tag:ntpd /sbin/ntpd pool.ntp.org -- NTP daemon
.Ed
.It Cm log
Default
.Cm prio
is
.Cm daemon.info
and the default
.Cm tag
identity is the basename of the service or run/task command.
.El
.Sh RESCUE MODE
Finit supports a rescue mode which is activated by the
.Cm rescue
option on the kernel command line.  The rescue mode comes in two
flavors:
.Em traditional
and
.Em fallback .
.Ss Traditional
This is what most users expect.  A very early maintenance login prompt,
served by the bundled
.Pa /libexec/finit/sulogin
program, or the standard
.Cm sulogin
from util-linux or BusyBox is searched for in the UNIX default
.Cm $PATH .
If a successful login is made, or the user exits (Ctrl-D), the rescue
mode is ended and the system boots up normally.
.Pp
.Sy Note:
if the user (UID 0 and GID 0) does not have a password, or
.Em the account is locked ,
the user is presented with a password-less prompt:
.Cm "Press enter to enter maintenance mode." ,
which opens up a root shell.
.Ss Fallback
If no
.Cm sulogin
program is found, Finit tries to bring up as much of its own
functionality as possible, yet limiting many aspects, meaning; no
network, no`fsck` of file systems in
.Pa /etc/fstab ,
no
.Pa /etc/rc.local ,
no
.Cm runparts ,
and most plugins are skipped (except those that provide functionality
for the condition subsystem).
.Pp
Instead of reading
.Pa /etc/finit.conf
et al, system configuration is read from
.Pa /lib/finit/rescue.conf ,
which can be freely modified by the system administrator.
.Pp
The bundled default `rescue.conf` contains nothing more than:
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent
runlevel 1
tty [12345] rescue
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Cm tty
has the
.Cm rescue
option set, which works similar to the board bring-up tty option
.Cm notty .
The major difference being that `sulogin` is started to query for
root/admin password.  If
.Cm sulogin
is not found,
.Cm rescue
behaves like
.Cm notty
and gives a plain root shell prompt.
.Pp
If Finit cannot find
.Pa /lib/finit/rescue.conf
it defaults to:
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent
tty [12345] rescue
.Ed
.Pp
There is no way to exit the
.Em fallback
rescue mode.
.Sh SERVICE ENVIRONMENT
Finit supports sourcing environment variables from
.Pa /etc/default/* ,
or similar.  This is a common pattern from SysV init scripts, where the
start/stop script is a generic script for the given service,
.Cm foo ,
and the options for the service are sourced from the file
.Pa /etc/default/foo .
Like this:
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent
/etc/default/foo:

    FOO_OPTIONS=--extra-arg="bar" -s -x

/etc/finit.conf:

    service [2345] env:-/etc/default/foo foo -n $FOO_OPTIONS -- Example foo daemon
.Ed
.Pp
Here the service
.Cm foo
is started with
.Op Fl -n ,
to make sure it runs in the foreground, and the with the options found
in the environment file.  With the
.Cm ps
command we can see that the process is started with:
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent
foo -n --extra-arg=bar -s -x
.Ed
.Pp
.Sy Note:
the leading `-` determines if Finit should treat a missing environment
file as blocking the start of the service or not.  When `-` is used, a
missing environment file does
.Em not
block the start.
.Sh SERVICE WRAPPER SCRIPTS
If your service requires to run additional commands, executed before the
service is actually started, like the systemd `ExecStartPre`, you can
use a wrapper shell script to start your service.
.Pp
The Finit service
.Cm .conf
file can be put into
.Pa /etc/finit.d/available ,
so you can control the service using
.Cm initctl .
Then use the path to the wrapper script in the Finit
.Cm .conf
service stanza.  The following example employs a wrapper script in
.Pa /etc/start.d .
.Bd -unfilled
/etc/finit.d/available/program.conf:

    service [235] <!> /etc/start.d/program -- Example Program

/etc/start.d/program:

    #!/bin/sh
    # Prepare the command line options
    OPTIONS="-u $(cat /etc/username)"

    # Execute the program
    exec /usr/bin/program $OPTIONS
.Ed
.Pp
.Sy Note:
the example sets
.Cm <!>
to denote that it doesn't support SIGHUP.  That way Finit will
stop/start the service instead of sending SIGHUP at restart/reload
events.
.Sh CGROUPS
There are three major cgroup configuration directives:
.Pp
.Bl -enum -offset indent -compact
.It
Global top-level group: init, system, user, or a custom group
.It
Selecting a top-level group for a set of run/task/services
.It
Per run/task/service limits
.El
.Pp
Top-level group configuration.
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent
# Top-level cgroups and their default settings.  All groups mandatory
# but more can be added, max 8 groups in total currently.  The cgroup
# 'root' is also available, reserved for RT processes.  Settings are
# as-is, only one shorthand 'mem.' exists, other than that it's the
# cgroup v2 controller default names.
cgroup init   cpu.weight:100
cgroup user   cpu.weight:100
cgroup system cpu.weight:9800
.Ed
.Pp
Adding an extra cgroup
.Cm maint/
will require you to adjust the weight of the above three.  We leave
.Cm init/
and
.Cm user/
as-is reducing weight of
.Cm system/
to 9700.
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent
cgroup system cpu.weight:9700

# Example extra cgroup 'maint'
cgroup maint  cpu.weight:100
.Ed
.Pp
By default, the
.Cm system/
cgroup is selected for almost everything.  The
.Cm init/
cgroup is reserved for PID 1 itself and its closest relatives.  The
.Cm user/
cgroup is for local TTY logins spawned by getty.
.Pp
To select a different top-level cgroup, e.g.
.Cm maint/ ,
one can either define it for a group of run/task/service directives in a
.Cm .conf
or per each stanza:
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent
cgroup.maint
service [...] <...> /path/to/foo args -- description
service [...] <...> /path/to/bar args -- description
.Ed
.Pp
or
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent
service [...] <...> cgroup.maint /path/to/foo args -- description
.Ed
.Pp
The latter form also allows per-stanza limits on the form:
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent
service [...] <...> cgroup.maint:cpu.max:10000,mem.max:655360 /path/to/foo args -- description
.Ed
.Pp
Notice the comma separation and the
.Cm mem.
exception to the rule: every cgroup setting maps directly to cgroup v2
syntax.  I.e.,
.Cm cpu.max
maps to the file
.Pm /sys/fs/cgroup/maint/foo/cpu.max .
There is no filtering, except for expanding the shorthand
.Cm mem.
to
.Cm memory. ,
if the file is not available, either the cgroup controller is not
available in your Linux kernel, or the name is misspelled.
.Pp
Linux cgroups and details surrounding values are not explained in the
Finit documentation.  The Linux admin-guide cover this well:
.Lk https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/admin-guide/cgroup-v2.html
.Sh LIMITATIONS
As of Finit v4 there are no limitations to where
.Cm .conf
settings can be placed.  Except for the system/global
.Cm rlimit
and
.Cm cgroup
top-level group declarations, which can only be set from
.Pa /etc/finit.conf ,
since it is the first
.Cm .conf
file Finit reads.
.Pp
Originally,
.Pp /etc/finit.conf
was the only way to set up a Finit system.  Today it is mainly used for
bootstrap settings like system hostname, early module loading for
watchdogd, network bringup and system shutdown.  These can now also be
set in any
.Cm .conf
file in
.Pa /etc/finit.d .
.Pp
There is, however, nothing preventing you from having all configuration
settings in
.Pa /etc/finit.conf .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr finit 8 ,
.Xr initctl 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.Nm finit
was conceived and reverse engineered by Claudio Matsuoka.  Since v1.0,
maintained by Joachim Wiberg, with contributions by many others.
