.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\" First parameter, NAME, should be all caps
.\" Second parameter, SECTION, should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
.\" other parameters are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
.Dd July 10, 2025
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.
.Dt INITCTL 8 SMM
.Os Linux
.Sh NAME
.Nm initctl
.Nd Control tool for Finit
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm /sbin/initctl
.Op Fl bcfhjlpqtvV
.Op COMMAND
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is the official tool for interacting with
.Xr finit 8 .
It comes with functions for showing status, querying health of services,
as well as editing, enabling and disabling services.
.Sh OPTIONS
This program follows the usual UNIX command line syntax, with long
options starting with two dashes (`-').  The options are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl b, -batch
Batch mode, no screen size probing.  Useful for scripting
.It Fl c, -create
Create missing paths (and files) as needed.  Useful with the
.Cm edit
command
.It Fl f, -force
Ignore missing files and arguments, never prompt
.It Fl h, -help
Show built-in help text
.It Fl j, -json
JSON output in
.Ar status
and
.Ar cond
commands
.It Fl n, -noerr
When scripting
.Nm
to stop, start, restart, or signal a task or service, this option can be
used to ignore error 69 (no such task or service) and instead return 0
(OK)
.It Fl 1, -once
Only one lap in commands like top
.It Fl p, -plain
Use plain table headings, no ANSI control characters
.It Fl q, -quiet
Silent, only return status of command
.It Fl t, -no-heading
Skip table headings
.It Fl v, -verbose
Verbose output, where applicable
.It Fl V, -version
Show program version
.El
.Sh COMMANDS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Nm Ar debug
Toggle
.Nm finit
(daemon) debug to
.Pa /dev/console
.It Nm Ar help
Show built-in help text
.It Nm Ar version
Show program version
.It Nm Ar ls | list
List all
.Cm *.conf
files in
.Pa /etc/finit.d
.It Nm Ar create Ar CONF
Create
.Cm .conf
in
.Pa /etc/finit.d/available .
.Pp
Piping the contents into
.Nm
works as one would expect:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
echo "task name:foo /tmp/foo.sh -- Foo logger" | initctl create foo
initctl enable foo
initctl reload
.Ed
.It Nm Ar delete Ar CONF
Delete
.Cm .conf
in
.Pa /etc/finit.d/available
.It Nm Ar show Ar CONF
Show
.Cm .conf
in
.Pa /etc/finit.d/available
.It Nm Ar edit Ar CONF
Edit
.Cm .conf
in
.Pa /etc/finit.d/available
.It Nm Ar touch Ar CONF
Change (mark as modified)
.Cm .conf
in
.Pa /etc/finit.d/available ,
like
.Ar edit
this tells
.Nm finit
that a configuration has been changed and is a candidate to be reloaded
(SIGHUP'ed or restarted) on
.Cm initctl reload
in dependency order
.It Nm Ar enable Ar CONF
Enable
.Cm .conf
in
.Pa /etc/finit.d/available ,
i.e., add symlink in
.Pa /etc/finit.d/enabled
.It Nm Ar disable Ar CONF
Disable
.Cm .conf
in
.Pa /etc/finit.d/enabled ,
i.e., removes symlink
.It Nm Ar reload
Reload all (touched)
.Cm *.conf in
.Pa /etc/finit.d
and activate changes
.It Nm Ar cond set Ar COND Op COND ...
Set (assert) user-defined condition,
.Cm +usr/COND
.It Nm Ar cond get Ar COND
Get (quietly) the status of any condition.  Defaults to user-defined
condions, but if a slash is detected, e.g.,
.Cm pid/foo
or
.Cm net/eth0/exist ,
then any condition can be read.
.Pp
The command is geared for scripting, check the exit code to get the
status of the condition: 0 - on, 1 - off, 255 - flux.  For a more
verbose output, use the
.Fl v
option
.It Nm Ar cond clr | clear Ar COND Op COND ...
Clear (deassert) user-defined condition,
.Cm -usr/COND
.It Nm Ar cond status
Show condition status, default
.Cm cond
command.  Also supports the
.Fl j
option for detailed JSON output
.It Nm Ar cond dump Op Cm TYPE
Dump all, or a given type of, conditions and their status.  Also
supports the
.Fl j
option for detailed JSON output
.It Nm Ar ident Op Cm NAME
Display indentities of all run/task/services, or only instances
matching
.Cm NAME .
A partial string, e.g.,
.Cm NAM ,
will not match anything
.It Nm Ar log Op Cm NAME
Show ten last Finit, or
.Cm NAME ,
messages from syslog
.It Nm Ar start Cm NAME[:ID]
Start service by name, with optional ID, e.g.,
.Cm initctl start tty:1
.It Nm Ar stop Cm NAME[:ID]
Stop/Pause a running service by name
.It Nm Ar reload Cm NAME[:ID]
Reload service as if its configuration had changed.  Internally,
.Nm finit
marks the named service as "dirty" and turns the state machine,
resulting in a SIGHUP or restart of (at least) the named service.
Any dependant services are also restarted.
.Pp
.Sy Note:
no .conf file is reloaded with this variant of the command.  Essentially
it is the same as calling
.Cm restart .
Except for two things:
.Bl -enum -offset indent -compact
.It
if the service supports HUP (or has a
.Cm reload:script )
it is signaled instead of stop-started, and
.It
it allows restarting run/task in the same runlevel -- which is otherwise
restricted
.El
.It Nm Ar <kill | signal> Cm NAME:[ID] S
Send signal S to service, by name.
.Cm S
may be a complete signal name such as SIGHUP, or short name such as HUP, or the signal number such as 1 (SIGHUP)
.It Nm Ar restart Cm NAME[:ID]
Restart (stop/start) service by name
.It Nm Ar status Cm NAME[:ID]
Show service status, by name.  If only
.Cm NAME
is given and multiple instances exits, a summary of all matching
instances are shown.  Only an exact match displays detailed status
for a given instance.
.Pp
With the
.Fl q
option this command is silent, provided the
.Ar NAME[:ID]
selection matches a single run/task/service. The exit code of
.Nm
is non-zero if there is a problem.  Zero is returned if a run/task has
run (at least) once in the current runlevel, and when a service is running
(as expected).  See the
.Fl j
option for detailed JSON output suitable for machine parsing.
.Pp
.Sy Tip:
.Xr jq 1
is a useful scripting tool in combination with JSON output
.It Nm Ar status
Show status of all services, default command.  Also supports the
.Fl j
option for detailed JSON output
.It Nm Ar cgroup
List cgroup config overview
.It Nm Ar ps
List processes based on cgroups
.It Nm Ar top
Show top-like listing based on cgroups
.It Nm Ar plugins
List installed plugins
.It Nm Ar runlevel Op Ar 0-9
Show or set runlevel: 0 halt, 6 reboot.
.Pp
If called at boot (runlevel S) to set the runlevel, Finit only schedules
the change, effectively overriding the configured runlevel from
.Pa /etc/finit.conf .
Useful to trigger a fail-safe mode, or similar
.It Nm Ar reboot
Reboot system, default if
.Cm reboot
is symlinked to
.Nm 
.It Nm Ar halt
Halt system, default if
.Cm halt
is symlinked to
.Nm 
.It Nm Ar poweroff
Power-off system, default if
.Cm poweroff
is symlinked to
.Nm 
.It Nm Ar suspend
Suspend system, default if
.Cm suspend
is symlinked to
.Nm 
.It Nm Ar utmp show
Raw dump of UTMP/WTMP db
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr finit.conf 5
.Xr finit 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.Nm finit
was conceived and reverse engineered by Claudio Matsuoka.  Since v1.0,
maintained by Joachim Wiberg, with contributions by many others.
